# Introduction to Classes in C++

## C Structures and their Limitations

Structures in C provide a means to logically group related data items for creating and implementing user-defined types. For example:

```C
struct student
{
  char nameofStudent[20];
  int rollNumber;
  float totalMarks;
};

struct student A;     // declaring a structure

// Accessing member variables
strcpy(A.nameofStudent, "Santosh");
A.rollNumber = 4610212;
totalMarks = 6.5;

```

```struct``` data types in C cannot be treated like built-in types. For example:

```C
struct complex_number
{
  float x;
  float y;
};
  
struct complex_number c1,c2,c3;

c1.x = 1;
c1.y = 0;
c2.x = 0;
c2.y = 1;

c3 = c1 + c2;                  // is illegal
struct complex_number c4;      // correct way to declare struct types in C

c4 = c3;                       // illegal in C
complex_number c4;             // illegal in C, but allowed in C++

```

The other limitations include 
* structures in C do not permit data hiding, structure members can be directly accessed using structure variables by any function in their scope
* structures in C cannot have member functions.

## Extensions to Structures in C++

Structures in C++ are an extension to the C structure, they support all basic capabalities of C structures as well as several additional features:
* to bring user defined types as close as possible to built-in types
  * structure names are stand alone, and can be used like any other type name - keyword ```struct``` can be ommitted in declaration of structure variables
  * example - ```complex_number c4;      //illegal in C, but allowed in C++```
* provide facility to hide data, data can also be declared as ```private``` so that it cannot be accessed by external functions
* support inheritance
* in C++ a structure can have both variables and functions as members

> The only difference between a structure and a class in C++ is that, by default the members of a class are private, while by default the members of a structure are public. Since classes in C++ are a specially introduced data type in C++, classes are used to hold both data and functions, and structures are used to only hold data.

## Classes and Objects
 A class is a way to bind both data and functions together, and create an abstract data type. They are declared using keyword ```class```, whose functionality is similar to that of the C keyword ```struct```, but with the possibility of including functions as members, instead of only data. It takes the following form:

```C++
class class_name
{

  permission_label1:
    variable declarations;
    function declarations;
  permission_label2:
    variable declarations;
    function declarations;
  ...
} object_name;
```

Where *class_name* is a name for the class (user defined type) and the optional field *object_name* is one, or several, valid object identifiers. The body of the declaration can contain members, that can be either data or function declarations, and optionally permission labels, that can be any of these three keywords: ```private```, ```public``` or ```protected```. They make reference to the permission which the following members acquire:

* ```private``` members of a class are accessible only from other members of their same class or from their "friend" classes.
* ```protected``` members are accessible from members of their same class and friend classes, and also from members of their derived classes.
* ```public``` members are accessible from anywhere the class is visible. 

If we declare members of a class before including any permission label, the members are considered private, since it is the default permission that the members of a class acquire. 

* *Data members* - variables declared inside a class
* *Member functions (methods)* - functions declared inside a class

#### Declaring a Class

Simple example of a ```class``` declaration:

```C++
class Rectangle
{

  private:
  float length;
  float breadth;
  
  public:
  void getdata();
  void putdata();
  float area();
  float perimeter();
};
```
The class ```Rectangle```contains two data members, and four member functions. The data members are only accessible by these member functions. 

#### Creating and Instaniating Objects

Once a class has been declared, we can create variables of that type by using the class name just like any other built-in type. Objects can also be created by placing their names after closing brace: For example,

```
Rectangle Rect1;           // memory allocated for object Rect1;
Rectangle Rect1,Rect2;     // more than one objects can also be declared in a single statement
```

#### Memory Allocation for Objects
Memory for an object is allocated when they are declared, and not when the class is specified. A class declaration is more of a template and does not create any memory space for objects. The member functions are created and placed in memory, once they are defined as a part of a class specification. Since all objects belonging to a class use the same member functions, no seperate space is allocated for member function each time an object is created. Only space for member variables are allocated seperatly for each object, and they share the member functions.


#### Accessing Members of a Class

Private data members of a class can ONLY be accessed through the member functions of that class. To call a member function:

``` object-name.function-name(actual-arguments);```

For example, the following assigns value to the data members of the class:

```C++
class item
{
   int tageNumber;
   char serviceTag[10];
   
   public:
   void getData(int number, char name)
   void putData();

} item1, item2, item3;

int main()
{
item1.getData(302120,"WER12CV123");        // assign values to member variables of object item1
item2.putData();                           // print values stored in object item2
}

// Following statements are illegal:

getData(302120, "WER12CV123");
item1.tagNumber = 302120;
```
Objects communicate by sending and recieving messages, and this can only be done via member functions. 

#### Accessing public members using the dot operator (.)

The variables declared as public can be accessed by the objects directly.

```C++

class item
{
  public:
  int tagNumber;
  char serviceTag[10];
};

int main()
{

  item item1;
  item1.tagNumber = 302120;
  strcpy("WER12CV123", item1.serviceTag);
  
  return 0;
  
}

```

#### Local Classes

## Member Functions

Member functions can be defined in two ways:
* Outside class definition
* Inside class definition

#### Outside Class Definition

Member functions which are declared inside the class need to be defined seperatly outside the class, by incorporating a membership identiy label. This label tells the compiler which class the function belongs to:

```
return-type class-name :: function-name (argument list)
{
   Function body
}
```

```::``` is the scope resolution operator which informs the compiler that the ```function-name``` belongs to ```class-name```. For example, the ```getData()``` function above can be defined as:

```C++

class item
{
  int tagNum;
  char serviceTagName[10];
  
  public:
  void getData(int number, char tagValue);
  void putData();
}

void item :: getData()
{
  tagNum = number;
  strcpy(serviceTagName, tagValue);
}

void item :: putData()
{
  cout << "Tag Number:" << tagNum << "Service Tag:" << serviceTagName;
}

```

Member functions have some special characteristics:
* Several different classes can use the same function name.
* Only member functions (and *friend functions*) can access the private data of a class, a non-member function cannot.
* A member function can call another member function, without using the dot (.) operator.
  
#### Inside Class Definition

Another way to define a member function is to include the function definition inside the class itself, when done so such a function becomes an inline function. Usually, very small functions are defined inside the class to become inline functions.


```C++

class item
{
  int tagNum;
  char serviceTagName[10];
  
  public:
  
  void getData(int number, char tagValue);     // in-line function
  {
  tagNum = number;
  strcpy(serviceTagName, tagValue);
  }
  
  void putData();                            // in-line function
  {
  cout << "Tag Number:" << tagNum << "Service Tag:" << serviceTagName;
  }

}

```

#### Making an Outside Function Inline
#### Nesting of Member Functions
#### Private Member Functions


## Arrays within Class

## Static Data Members and Functions
### Static Data Members
### Static Member Functions
## const Member Functions
## Arrays of Objects
## Objects as Function Arguments
## Returning Objects
## Friendly Functions
## Pointers to Members
### Accessing Members Using the Pointer Operator (->)
### this pointer
